standard of care for gleo blastoma is
responsible for the overall poor
survival and death of these patients
Absolutely I'll stand by that because I
have the scientific evidence to support
that they're all the same disease is
brain cancer is not this different from
breast colon they all have the same
problem with mitochondria they all
dependent on glucose and glutamine it's
not a 100 diseases it's One Singular
disease of energy of disregulated energy
uh production now how complicated is
that I the future is this what I just
told you is the future and we're gonna
maybe not me but others will perfect it
to the point where cancer will not be
considered a fearful disease but you
know we have a people will start getting
healthy uh when you're killing their
cancer cells not making them worse hair
Fallout what are you talking about my
name is AA SS and welcome to live longer
World Professor seed welcome to live
longer world oh it's nice to be here
thank you so I think your research is
remarkable because it's turning the
cancer parad time on its head and it's
been what over 50 years since President
Nixon declared the war on cancer we've
been spending billions of dollars to try
and cure of this disease and yet as
you've pointed out in your research we
have something like 1,700 people a day
dying from cancer in the United States
alone your work I think speaks to why
this might be happening so can you speak
to what's wrong with the current cancer
paradigm
well thank you it's the the current
cancer Paradigm is based on cancer being
a genetic
disease and uh if you go to the National
Cancer Institute
website uh it says cancer is a genetic
disease comprising over 100 different
types of disorders all driven by
different kinds of genetic
mutations
um the new data or D if you look if you
look carefully at the data uh does not
support uh this information from the
National Cancer Institute as a matter of
fact to accept CA cancer being a genetic
disease one would have to be either
cognitively challenged or a hopeless
idealogue because um the evidence
clearly shows that we have some cancers
that have no
mutations we have driver mutations in
normal tissues and Driver mutations were
thought to be those that really led to
the disregulated cell growth like p53
and some of these others and now we find
these p-53 mutations in normal tissues
of people that never have disregulated
growth and the nuclear transfer
experiments which have been repeated in
many different types of cancers under
different experimental paradigms uh
where the nucleus of the tumor cell is
put into a a new a normal cytoplasm and
you don't get disregulated growth where
if the normal nucleus is put into a
tumor cytoplasm you get disregulated
growth um the the this
information overwhelmingly says Cancer
Cannot Be A genetic disease and what uh
warberg had first done and what I've
pushed over what he had done shows that
cancer is a mitochondrial metabolic
disease not a genetic disease and this
is the reason why we're not making any
progress um you have to realize there's
two things here number one we've put
billions of dollars into the into the
cancer genome Atlas and thinking cancer
is a a genetic
disease and um it hasn't it hasn't had
any Major Impact in reducing
deaths um consequently because that has
not come to fruition we continue to
poison and irradiate people because the
the uh the idea was that if cancer were
a genetic disease and we were able to
Target the genetic mutation we could get
rid of the poisonous and poisons and
radiation but because cancer is not a
genetic disease we can now have to
continue with poisons and radiation and
all the other things that are being uh
done like immunotherapies are based on
cancer being a genetic disease some
people do well on immunotherapies but
you can just as well die from the
therapy as being cured from it and uh a
lot of people don't even respond to it
so clearly that's not having it's not
moving the needle and you're right uh
each year we get more and more dead
people people and we're not making any
PR I don't care what anybody says 1,700
people a day dying in the United States
70 an hour and continues to increase
year after year it means that we have
made zero progress so uh when you drop
the death rate by
30% then you know you're starting on the
right path but we're not doing that so I
mean people can look at I look at it as
a Monumental failure and it's a failure
because the the theory of what the
disease is incorrect and when you have
incorrect Theory you're not you're not
going to move the
needle so this old Theory which I
suppose is still the Paradigm is the
somatic mutation theory of cancer which
is that cancer is a genetic disease I'm
curious where does it even come from in
the first place well it comes from a
number of different places it it it came
from the fact that in the n in the 1950s
when Watson and Crick uh were awarded
the Nobel Prize for the structure of DNA
um and people had always it actually
starts with uh Theodore boy in
1914 when he speculated that there was
some abnormalities in the nucleus of
cancer cells based on studies in sea
urchins uh which doesn't make any sense
to me and one of his friends I think his
name was hamerslag told boy Theodore boy
that um this is all nonsense as a matter
of fact boy wrote a a a big article on
on this and and was very apologetic
about cancer being a genetic disease he
said I have no clue about what cancer is
I don't know anything about it
everything is pure speculation and I
could be completely wrong yet he was
anointed as the father of the sematic
mutation Theory so but he himself said I
don't know anything about cancer and
then others came along uh and started to
cancer damaged to the nuclear genome was
always seen in in not always but
recognized often recognized in cancer
cells but it wasn't until the the early
50s when Watson and Crick found the
structure of DNA and then you found
structural abnormalities in the nucleus
of cancer cells structural DNA
abnormalities and everybody was you know
uh Gene Gene think uh genes control
everything and you have mutations in
genes and uh that's going to lead to
disregulated cell growth um and and the
and the and the more and more scientists
jumped onto this these enogen and tumor
suppressor genes and all these kinds of
things but um uh failing to recognize
that the gene mutations themselves are
arising from the damage to the oxidative
phosphorilation so the genes are not the
cause they're the effects um and once
you realize that then it's such an
embarrassment uh and tragedy to realize
that by by a uh re the resistance to
change and the the attachment to this
incorrect theory has led to all these
poor folks being being killed by not
only the disease but the treatments I
don't know I think half the people that
are treated for cancer die from the
treatments I mean it's horrific you
don't poison and irradiate people to
make them healthy right this is what
they do surgically mutilate them remove
breasts and colons and lungs I mean uh
this is the way we're treating cancer
patients Med as I said in my other inter
it's medieval
nothing could be more medieval than the
current cancer Paradigm of treating
people so one point you're saying is
that first of all not all cancers even
have mutations and then secondly even
the nuclear mutations that do happen are
a downstream effect of something that's
wrong with the mitochondria and the
respiration going wrong in the
mitochondria so it's not the mutation in
other words is not the primary cause of
cancer it's a downstream effect if at
all it happens in a cancer cell that's
right that's right and the and the when
the oxidative phosphorilation the the
ability of the cell to generate energy
through oxygen when that becomes
compromised these cancer cells produce
reactive oxygen species
Ros and they are carcinogenic and
mutagenic so the mutations and damage we
see in the nucleus uh uh come from in
large part the r so uh there's a clear
link uh between damaged respiration and
the mutation so we've been chasing tail
we've been chasing uh Downstream effects
and when you chase Downstream effects
the outcome is 1700 people a day dying
and it's not getting any
better now how do we know that the
primary cause of cancer is damage to the
mitochondria and
respiration well uh we know that uh
because mitochondria controlled the
differentiated state of the
cell mitochondria can determine they
control the cell cycle
through um calcium signaling changes
that our mitochondria does this based on
uh on the proton mode of gradient in the
mitochondria so when when cells need to
divide they don't divide out of control
mitochondria maintains division under
control or maintains the quiescent
quiescent state of the cell uh when that
organel uh loses control uh over uh the
energy metabolism of the cell the cell
falls back on fermentation metabolism uh
which is uh energy without oxygen this
is the kind of energy that existed uh on
on the earth before oxygen came into the
atmosphere 2.5 billion years ago all all
the cells at that time were dri were
disregulated in their growth and driven
by a fermentation metabolism so the
cancer cell is doing nothing more than
falling back on these ancient Pathways
leading to a disregulated cell growth
because the mitochondria that's supposed
to control this process no is loses
control of this uh due to a number of
different insults uh that could damage
the efficiency of oxidative
phosphorilation so there's a two-step
process one is a gradual slow
Interruption with oxidative
phosphorilation you know maybe from
intermittent hypoxia systemic
inflammation some viruses some chemical
carcinogens any one of these provocative
agents can lead to a gradual disruption
of oxidative phosphor leading to a
gradual increase in what we call
substrate level phosphorilation or uh um
energy energy production without oxygen
so substrate level phosphorilation can
produce energy without oxygen so the
cell and and the default state of
mamalian cells is proliferation and and
and and and the control of proliferation
is directed by the mitochondria so if
the mitochondria gradually become
dysfunctional energetically and the cell
falls back on its energy default state
which is proliferation then the cell is
in a disregulated state so the
mitochondria control the destiny the
differentiated state of the cell and
then you get all the secondary mutations
a lot of other secondary they control
the aptic signaling what does that mean
programed cell death so when when when
our cells are injured the mitochondria
release cytochrom C leading to a Cascade
and program cell death in other words
the cell is programmed to die because
it's has damage or something along along
these lines mitochondria control that
they control the kill switch of the cell
and when the mitochondria become
defective the kill switch is broken so
the cell bypasses the normal program
cell death mechanism continues to
proliferate out of control driven by air
ation metabolism if people understand
evolutionary
biology uh uh and general biology and
what I'm saying makes perfect sense
because it's all supported by scientific
literature but when you are are
indoctrinated to think cancer is a
genetic disease you don't think about
any of the stuff that I just spoke about
and therefore you have this perpetuation
of uh of dead people so until until this
what I just said is understood and
recognized more clearly then we're not
going to make any changes
that's super helpful so one of the
things you said is that because the
mitochondria is defective in cancer
cells that's also one of the reasons
cancer cells are not able to die
themselves versus normal healthy cells
if they get damaged you have this
apoptosis process yeah and that's one of
the things in the Hallmarks of cancer
it's the it's the U um failure to
recognize apoptosis apotosis so and the
different and disregulated cell growth
that comes from the fact that the cells
are fermenting so um all of these things
you can go through all the Hallmarks of
cancer and Link all of the Hallmarks
clearly back to mitochondrial
dysfunction is this is mitochondrial
dysfunction something you see in all
types of cancer are there certain
cancers where you don't see this I I did
a deep dive on this whole thing spent a
lot of time you have to go back H in the
scientific literature and look at
electron microscopy um because the
electron microscope wasn't perfected
until the 1950s 60s people you know
started looking at the ultra structure
of cells because on light micro
microscopy you really can't see much a
mitochondria threadlike threadlike
organel that uh exist in the cytoplasm
but in order to really look at them
carefully and in detail you need
electron microscopy so when you go back
and look at uh a lot of these guys that
were looking at the ultr structure of
tumor cells uh were just pointing out
what they saw uh you know there was a
lot of cellular abnormalities but a lot
of the mitochondria were um abnormal in
structure uh they had sometimes no
christe the inner membrane elaboration
of the organel uh there were sometimes
there were few mitochondria sometimes
the cytoplasm was packed with abnormal
looking uh mitochondria there's all
kinds of morphological abnormalities and
then of course when uh cell biology
uh became starting to isolate
mitochondria in pure form from tumor
cells uh it was clear that there was all
kinds of functional abnormalities I in
these uh organel and we here at Boston
College we we studied cardiol lippin
which is a a very specialized kind of
lipid in the inner membrane of the
mitochondria that plays a very
significant role in the efficiency of
the electron transport chain which is
ultimately the efficiency of oxidative
phosphorilation and uh we we found
massive changes in number uh uh uh uh
and structure of the of the cardiol
lipin meaning that this lipid which
controls the efficiency of mitochondria
was always abnorm in all the in fact no
one has found a tumor cell yet with the
normal structure and function of either
mitochondria or cardiol lippin so this
clearly tells us that these mitochondria
are not functionally effective they're
they're they're in they're in efficient
in their ability to produce energy
through uh respiration therefore the
cell falls back on a fermentation uh
mechanism which is energy without oxygen
and a disregulated growth is not not
that complicated if you understand the
biology of the
situation do you also see a change in
the proton motive force of the
mitochondria um yeah sometimes you do uh
sometimes it becomes excessively Steep
and other times it's dissipated there's
uncoupling proteins
uh the oxygen that enters the
mitochondria what we we and others have
found is not linked to ATP synthesis so
um our big discovery that warberg did
not know about nor does the most of the
people in the cancer field um they don't
know that there that there's two ways
for a cell to get
energy uh through um substrate level
phosphorilation one is in the glycolytic
pathway the m in meof parns pathway
which is the cytoplasmic pathway that
produces um energy and the payoff phase
of
glycolysis um and many cancer cells dump
lactic acid into the micro environment
which is the um uh where pyruvate
instead of going into the mitochondri
and being respired is reduced to lactate
which then accumulates in the micro
environment leading to
acidification uh tumor acidification is
common in many in many kinds of cancers
a warberg knew only about that uh our
Discovery was that there that there is a
substrate level
phosphorilation process inside the
mitochondria itself so this is an
organel that can both respire and
ferment under different kinds of
conditions and um and no one knew about
that that's our big Discovery paper just
came out recently late December 2024
where we we're getting tremendous
recognition uh about on this study for
the first time people are realizing that
these
mitochondria can ferment um uh glutamine
that glutamine amino acid can be
metabolized through the mitochondria to
suconic acid which also contributes to
extracellular acidification so now here
why everybody said warberg was wrong not
every why why so many people thought
warberg was wrong because War warberg
himself thought that oxygen consumption
in cancer mitochondria was also linked
to oxidative phosphorilation and his
critics said well how can how can warb
be right saying that Ox oxidative
phosphorilation is the origin of cancer
when cancers are taking in oxygen
sometimes as high as normal tissue and
this created a tremendous amount of
controversy because yes the the cancer
mitochondria does take in oxygen but
it's not due to it's not due to oxid
it's not contributing significantly to
oxida foration they they are producing
ATP through the mitochondria but through
a fermentation mechanism this is the big
new thing the new thing is the cancer
mitochondria can ferment and they dump
out succinic acid so uh now we put the
parts together from warberg warberg was
right cancer is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease he just didn't have
all of the details together like we have
today there it now it becomes
irrefutable cancer is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease driven by fermentation
metabolism because oxidative
phosphorilation is is inefficient so we
know this and therefore the cell
proliferates out of control because the
organel that's supposed to control this
is not working and and and now with the
knowledge that this is a
fermentation uh problem and that this
two the two fuels driving the
disregulated growth of the sugar glucose
and the amino acid glutamine and we know
because that mitochondria is defective
they can't use fatty acids or ketones
now we have a solution to the problem
right transition the whole body over to
ketones the tumor cells can't use them
they store them in the cytoplasm and
then you target simultaneously
simultaneously together the two
fermentable fields and these cancer
cells are checkmated so they can't use
anything else and how do we know that we
tested all this stuff we interrogated
these cells and to see what they can use
and can't use they can only use glucose
and glutamine yes they can use a little
bit of other things but the term is
Logistics in order to replace the high
energy efficiency of oxida
phosphorilation you better make sure
that the alternative fuels are present
in the micro environment in large
quantities to run the disregulated
growth and some of these other amino
acids are not there only glutamine so
clearly uh we know what's going on it's
just that unfortunately the world
doesn't doesn't know it or refuses to
accept it and therefore we got 1,700
people a day it's tragedy because we can
stop it we can significantly reduce it
with what I told you if there were if
but the clinical
trials uh we have to have people that
are knowledgeable so we have to train
people to understand what I just said
understand how we and we just put this
big paper in a big protocol paper for
gleo blastoma that goes through a lot of
what I said by by my colleague Dr Thomas
duer next door here works with me and we
have 25 other uh nutritionist dietitians
scientists MDS Physicians all kinds on
this paper once they realize that this
will be the strategy for managing cancer
we can adapt it for all the cancers
they're all the same disease there brain
cancer is not the different from breast
colon they all have the same problem
with mitochondria they all dependent on
glucose and glutamine it's not a 100
diseases it's One Singular disease of
energy of disregulated energy uh
production now how complicated is
that now that's such an important point
that I want to stress on because I think
everyone like we've discussed thinks
that every type of cancer is different
and even within breast cancer you have
different types of cancers because of
the different mutations that are
happening but what you are saying is
that that's absolutely false in fact
Cancer all types of cancer is one
disease and it stems from the fact that
there's dysfunction to the mitochondria
and I just want to try to summarize some
of the points key points you mentioned
which is that despite the presence of
oxygen cancer cells are fermenting what
that means is that because they're
fermenting now they're using up two fuel
tools which you've shown through a lot
of your work glucose and
glutamine and they can't use fatty acids
so if we can cut off the glucose and
glutamine that is one potential way we
can start dealing with cancer and all of
this entails understanding the fact that
cancer is a metabolic disease and it's
not a genetic disease yeah I mean that's
that's pretty much the what it is now
we're we're at we're we're the tip of
the spear on this whole thing and uh it
has to be perfected it has to be dosage
timing and scheduling are the ways to
perfect this and this is what we call
non-sexy science this is mostly trial
and error so people don't like s oh wow
you got some Innovative Innovative we
got 1,700 people a day dying that we can
we can significantly reduce but it's not
sexy science it's trial and error uh on
how to Target glucose and glutamine
without harming the rest of the body and
uh you can do lower glucose with diet
but you can't do that with uh glutamine
so you have to use drugs and what are
these drugs well they're glutamine
targeting drugs they block the ability
of glutamine to be metabolized and if
you don't know how to do that the right
way with the right dosage you could not
make it work as effectively as it should
be um so we have to do H we have to hold
the The Noose uh on glucose which is
which you know people can do that that's
why we develop the glucose Ketone index
calculator uh to allow patients people
to know that you can bring your blood
sugar down and elevate your ketones and
get into this nice low Zone and then you
come in and you target the glutamine uh
while you have the patient in a low gki
and that requires some skill because
targeting glutamine you have to be very
delicate it runs it keeps our gut
healthy and it keeps our immune system
healthy uh a Ura cycle so glutamine is
an extremely important molecule if you
don't don't know how to ma manage it
then uh you could potentially not have
this therapeutic strategy work as
successful as as it should be and I
don't know everybody seems they all say
I what do I have to eat eat eat eat for
CRA I don't know what they're all based
on this bring your gki down and then we
come in with uh drugs to Target
glutamine has nothing to do with
glutamine in the diet zero to do with
glutamine in the diet so it has to do
with targeting glutamine with drugs and
you have to do that strategically
otherwise it won't work as well so
people people say well a carbo oh yeah
don't eat carbohydrates bring your sugar
do water only fasting um it's it's
easier to get it's easier to get into
these zones on Carnivore than it is on
vegan so uh you have to be you know
chewing plants all day long like some
like like like some herb before you know
so uh um but you got to be careful
because you you got to get your gki down
you can do it if you eat plants but it's
just harder um you know I don't know
people can do whatever they want if you
want to stay alive they better
understand what I'm talking about
because it a lot of the treatment falls
on the shoulders of the patient so the
patient has to be knowledgeable and and
and and um compliant with the knowledge
uh otherwise it doesn't work people tell
me oh I can't do this well okay go get
radiated and poison see how see how that
works now when you say gluten me has to
be targeted strategically does that mean
you can't cut off all glutamine or I
guess it's probably not even possible to
yeah you it's the most abundant amino
acid in the body it's very high uh and
and it's needed for our immune system so
if you go in and shut down glutamine
completely you Dam Dage your gut and you
prevent your immune system from from
picking up the dead tumor cells who's
going to pick up the dead cells right so
you go in and you slaughter a population
of cells you got them laying around it's
like a battlefield you want to let them
all rot there you bury them you know
right so uh so you have and that's done
by our immune system and and they need
glutamine so the glutamine that the
cancer cell needs is the same glutamine
that the immune cell needs and as we've
shown all these metastatic cancers are
derived from our immune system
especially macrofagos so we know what
the metastatic cancer is regardless of
whether it's a liver a colon a breast a
brain all these metastatic cancer all
all these metastatic are are com
compromised macras also dependent on
glutamine so my adversary needs
glutamine and and and and and and my uh
therapeutic cells need glutamine so you
can't go in there okay you can kill
cancer cells but you then you prevent
your immune system from picking up the
corpses so you have to be a strategic so
what what we found is that if we hit
them with glutamine for a day uh what
happens the tumor cells get hammered and
die but the immune system doesn't die it
just gets paralyzed it it can't so you
pull off the glutamine let the immune
system now recover picking up the dead
cancer cells so again it's you degrade
slowly degrade slowly degrade while your
body is getting healthier and healthier
and healthier burning ketones and fatty
acids your normal cells but the tumor
cells are restricted they can't use
these tremendously powerful effective
alternative fuels fatty acids and Ketone
bodies so so we know the biology of what
we can do um it I the future is this
what I just told you is the future and
we're going to maybe not me but others
will perfect it to the point where
cancer will not be considered a fearful
disease but you you know we have a
people will start getting healthy uh
when you're killing their cancer cells
not making worse hair Fallout what are
you talking about anytime you've seen
these cancer people they're always bald
right that's be that that were treated
by somebody who has no clue about the
biology of canc should never be bald why
are you bald the cancer cells don't
exist in your hair follicles it's the
adverse offt Target effects of the
poisons uh that they're giving people
radiation and poison your hair goes why
you doing that the damn cells can't live
without glucose and glutamine it can't
transition to keton and fatty acids now
you know how to kill them and manage the
disease and you don't have to lose your
hair so um or are the bleeding gums and
you know diarrhea fatigue nausea
vomiting all this kind of crazy stuff
you don't you don't have to have that
but yet go and go down to your talk to
your oncologist go to the top medical
schools what I said to you they have no
never heard of it I have no clue most of
them now one other thing that is
probably part of your uh press port
protocol which is what you call it which
is restricting glucose and glutamine is
hypobaric oxygen therapy I think how is
that connected well can hyperbaric
oxygen therapy uh as Dominic he's expert
on that the austino you know uh we
published together and and um uh it
turns out that um putting a patient in
pressured oxygen dissolves
oxygen you you have to realize our arthr
sites carry oxygen and you could be they
could be 100% saturated with oxygen but
but the oxygen is not dissolved in the
plasma that that happens when you put
the patient in high pressure with oxygen
and uh if you have a a tumor cells with
bad mitochondria or inefficient
corrupted mitochondria and you put you
put Force oxygen onto them um they
produce more reactive oxygen species R
and that kills them and and the
interesting thing is that what protect
what protects them from Ros damage
listen and listen carefully what
protects the the cancer cell from Ro
damage um is the glucose and glutamine
because the glucose carbons are part of
the pentos pathway and the glutamine
produces glutamate which is part of the
glutathione mechanism the two
antioxidant systems so when I'm putting
a patient in restricted glucose and
glutamine and putting them in hyperbaric
oxygen I am making those tumor cells
extremely vulnerable to oxidative damage
it's almost like radiation without the
toxic effects because radiation kills
tumor cells by creating reactive oxygen
species R but why would you do radiation
it it harms your normal cells when you
can when you can do this uh uh uh with
with with regular so we can we can take
P patients put them in a low glucose
Ketone index uh then and then put them
in an oxygen pressure and that can also
help kill tumor cells without
toxicity I see okay um so you mentioned
you had this December 2024 study which
was a culmination of a lot of the work
you're doing but I think you've been
talking about glucose and glutamine for
a while now so what was new about this
research that just got published well
the the as I said if you ask anybody
about the glutamine issue uh in the
metabolism field they're going to say oh
yeah everybody knows about glutamine the
two tumor cells are glutamine addicted
but what I said to you is that they
think glutamine is respired uh part of
the respiration an anotic means the
replenishment of carbons to the TCA
cycle uh our Discovery was no it's
producing energy through mitochondrial
substrate level phosphorilation a
different mechanism uh from from
oxidative phosphorilation
so people people are know that glutamine
is important for cancer but they didn't
know the mechanism uh we're showing you
that it's a fermentation mechanis it's
another aerobic fermentation mechanism
that's producing energy through a
different a different strategy so you
have to simultaneously Target glutamine
and glucose together to get therapeutic
benefit because if you target glutamine
alone the cells will survive on glucose
and if you target glucose alone the
cells will survive on glutamine so you
got to get them both together at the
same time while the patient is in
nutritional ketosis and then you put a
much greater chance of eliminating the
tumor and even if you don't eliminate it
it be they become very indolent uh
they're not angry there's a lot less
inflammation and a lot a lot less
angiogenesis and all these other uh
aspects of an angry tumor inflamed uh we
reduce a lot of that so we we have some
cancer patients that um
were considered terminal but they're not
cured uh but they're living with it so
um Everybody Wants cure cure cure I'm
not listen get it managed man manage the
damn thing uh so your quality of life
and overall survival can be approved
whether you're cured or not who knows
but but the bottom line is you're living
longer with a higher quality of life
what's wrong with that nothing wrong
with that so that's what we're working
on we're not working on a cure we're
working on on effective uh um management
and if you get a cure good that's great
but if not then you still can be living
longer with a higher quality of life do
you think metabolic therapy can be done
at any stage of
cancer uh well uh certainly uh earlier
stages would work much much better um
some people call me from email me from
hospice and they've got like two days
left and I'm not sure whether their
bodies can can sustain uh the stress
metabolic stress in our preclinical
we're actually trying to do we're
actually testing that right now um we
take a mice and we give them tumors and
we let the tumors grow really big and
angry um where the mice start to suffer
uh uh just like a human just like a
human would be suffering and then we try
to come in with our uh metabolic therapy
and it's actually astonishing some of
these mice that might have only had a
couple of days to live uh really start
to recover better so I don't know at
what stage it becomes no longer
effective but uh we're testing that
that's what we do uh you see so many
papers in the scientific literature
where they put a few cells under the
skin of the mouse and like 24 hours
later they start a very aggressive
treatment and and then you all of a
sudden see wow look how effective this
is let that tumor grow really really big
and angry and metastatic and then try
your therapy and see if you can pull the
m pull the mouse out of it h that's what
we do because if we're successful in
doing that man we'll we'll have
tremendous success in the human in the
clinic uh knowing how to do that so we
stack the deck against us we want the
heartiest strongest tumors and we want
to see if metabolic therapy can work
against the the most aggressive and
angry tumors now of course in the human
liter clinics they have these stage zero
cancers a lot of them are called stage
zeros and they do some women getting
mastectomies and radiation on stage
zeros are you kidding me yeah metabolic
therapy will take care of those things
real quick I don't know what you're
doing why you just taking these
beautiful women and ripping their
cutting their breasts off cing m i mean
it makes no sense to me at all I don't
know what these people are doing don't
they read the scientific literature
don't they understand what we're talking
about here it's just it's just sad it's
it's really a
tragedy but do you think there's
something to be said when it's stay zero
and extremely local and small and it can
just come out via surgery then maybe
that's an easier better protocol to just
remove it all together when it's so
small well I think that's the that's
what we expect to do too we're not
arguing against and as a matter of fact
what we're finding if you do metabolic
therapy it it has two things number one
it it gets smaller and can be plucked
out really easy with a surgical
procedure or it disappears altogether so
why you want to take someone's breast
off if you can't find anything that you
were looking at right prophylactic you
kidding me I mean unless some women like
don't like their breasts and just want
them removed I I don't know what the the
logic is behind this but but but but any
event yeah so um uh the idea is is that
yes we can we can and and the other
thing too um we're not against all
standards of care what we're finding is
that sometimes chemotherapy in in very
small dosages has so much more
therapeutic efficacy when the patient is
in nutritional ketosis so we don't throw
out all the tools of the toolbox even
radiation if it's a hard to get uh tumor
with surgery uh and radiation could do
it better you would shrink the tumor
down using metabolic therapy and then
come in and incinerate it with a beam of
radiation and and not and making minimal
damage to surrounding tissues so so
again it's going to have to be a
complete re-evaluation of the kinds of
tools and procedures that we're using to
get a more successful outcome in
managing the disease and keeping people
people alive it's all possible it's just
that it's just that I don't know what it
is the field just oncology seems to be I
don't know they're kind of strange they
they can't seem to accept anything than
what other than what they do and what
they were trained to do but you know I
don't know how long it's going to take
for them to come to know I mean I just
don't know I think it's the information
is spreading at least to the patients
directly I hear a lot of people
recognizing this themselves that going
into ketosis and and and like you said
it's a little more nuanced than that
it's both glucose and glutamine I think
people themselves are waking up to this
which is is certainly extremely well
they're they're waking up a little bit
but I get so many people what should I
eat to reduce glutamine wrong you can't
do anything you got to use drugs drugs
drugs drugs and one of the drugs we use
is the endol fen bendol parasite
medications and uh they target the same
path ways that the tumor cells use so
that's why they work but they work much
better in therapeutic keto everything
works better when you're in therapeutic
ketosis so don't tell me anything until
you're in therapeutic ketosis then once
you're in th then you have a lot of then
you have a lot of options you know you
can go to your oncologist and tell him
just use one third and then he says oh I
can't do that this the system tells me
no it doesn't you you you got to tell
these guys see when I go to the doctor I
usually tell him exactly what I need to
have done uh uh when you ask him to
figure out out what you have you could
be a
bit might make sure you know what you
have before you go to these guys and say
just you know just do this for me okay
um but uh yeah the oncologists they're
trained to do what they do um and
unfortunately they're all uh all of them
or the majority of them are not trained
appropriately they think cancer is a
genetic disease and they just treat you
with very toxic poisons and radiation
and this kind of stuff and I think they
their success would be much better if
they knew cancer was a a mitoch
metabolic disease and then they would
use their radiation chemo and other
proced even immunotherapies could
potentially work better so um everything
will work better when you're in
nutritional ketosis your body is
stronger the tumor is weaker and
whatever you're throwing at it's going
to work better so all these things come
together speaking of drugs that block
glutamine another one you've mentioned
is Dawn which I think you said is not
available for some reason why is that
the case I don't know oh it should be it
should be the number one drug uh they
said it was too toxic and then when we
looked up the toxicity it wasn't
anything near like Red Devil carbo
platin and and these other things you
kidding me it's nothing has nothing like
like those um it's an it's a repurposed
drugs it it wasn't as effective it was
working pretty good against leukemia and
kids uh don't forget they used it on
children and they used it on but they
said oh it's a little toxic and it
doesn't work well yeah you didn't cover
you didn't choked the glucose you didn't
get the
glucose the problem is if they don't
they when you think cancer is a genetic
disease you I don't know it's like some
something happens to your brain be you
can't think you can't use rational
thinking
anymore but it'll change has to change
because people want to live I think
people want to live they don't want to
die you know so uh they have to come to
know this and the people will make the
decisions once they see the outcome
we're publishing individual case reports
we're publishing pre-clinical studies
I'm seeing more and more we're getting a
registry now of all these stage four
terminal cancer patients that outlive
their prognosis so uh we're we're we're
collecting more and more data at some
point there's going to be a Tipping
Point when the population says I want
metabolic therapy I want metabolic
therapy if you can't give it to me I'm
GNA find somebody who can so uh you
better these guys better get on on board
or get out of the way because it's
common yeah one thing I do love about
your work is the fact that you're not
just presenting Theory and some evidence
but you actually talk about real life
examples and cases of people who have
solved or at least managed their cancer
by following the metabolic therapy
protocol yeah well I I I mean that's why
I said it's not perfected yet but what
we're seeing tells us there's great hope
um you know uh whenever you have
anything new uh it's it's it's has to
all the different follow-ups to this
will make the whole situation better it
it is based on the science the science
tells us this is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease and we have defined
the fuels driving the disregulated
growth so now it becomes uh important to
perfect this how are we going to Target
those two fuels together uh and and uh
keep the body super healthy while while
you're targeting this and and and this
is going to be the new field this is the
new form of medicine and not only that
it works it like we saw for some of the
cancer patients um not only does their
cancer become more manageable but
they've also got rid of their diabetes
and their high blood pressure and their
hypertension this all goes away along
with the cancer so um clearly it has
impli implications for just overall
General Health because when you take
people today you know uh you you've seen
it so many times a person says oh I just
came back from that I had a little pain
a little blood or a little something and
I now they tell me I have a stage four
cancer and the guy looks pretty healthy
then soon as he under goes treatment I
mean he looks like some skeleton beat up
a horrible looking he's sick he's
miserable this shouldn't have to happen
this is nuts so uh um but yet yet I feel
so bad for the cancer patients they hear
what I say they get all fired up and
excited and then they go to the oncology
oncology
and says oh no sugar and diet have
nothing to do with it glucose and
glutamine no no nothing and when and
then they get angry and throw you out of
the office how do you think that makes
the patient feel you know the the
oncologist should be thrown out of the
office and have somebody in there has a
few functional brain cells you know um
about what's going on so I feel bad for
the oncologists too they just haven't
been trained I think they really are
good meaning people I just they just
locked into a failed system and um and
it's also very profitable so you you you
you the status quo is is is profitable
for all these different Industries but
if people want to live you're going to
have to change the status quo it's going
to have to
change one thing you mentioned is that
you're not against all standard of care
obviously chemotherapy could work in low
doses if you are in therapeutic ketosis
and I think um Istanbul Turkey some
places there might be trying this model
do you know what the results are of this
combination therapy well it works yeah
it works really well for some people um
nothing works well for everybody um
let's be honest I mean if if standards
of care are killing 50% of the people
that are that are being treated that
that ain't working really well either uh
metabolic therapy can work well does it
is it always a guaranteed to work well
when you try to reduce and manipulate
these things not always because you know
the same the same issues we have
compliance of the patient knowledge of
the patient you see the difference
between standards of care today and
metabolic therapy is that um the patient
has to be knowledgeable and very
understanding of what of what's being
done because a lot of the success falls
on the shoulders of the patient in the
current standard of the Care the patient
is a bystander they just sit there and
get and get treated they're not really
participating actively in in their in
the management of their disease um they
have a a scheduled radiation they have a
scheduled chemo and they just take the
radiation and take the chemo but they're
not doing any and then they say eat
whatever you want make sure you get a
lot of high carbohydrate foods to make
your strength back I mean this is insane
this is lack of knowledge of the on the
grand scale uh a complete
misunderstanding of what the nature of
the disease is and a failure to
understand biology so so this is the
problem for the poor patient I mean I
visited uh really top-notch oncology
centers and I see in the in the room I I
see a guy uh and and a lot of these
oncology they're clean white smiling
faces and and on one side and then PE
people being infused and poisoned on the
other side I mean you see a guy being
infused with chemotherapy while he has a
big coca colola and a hamburger in front
of him I mean it's nuts it's
nuts so what are you going to do about
that you have to educate people and let
them know this is crazy you don't do
stupid stuff like that you know so um
but anyway they do it and it's being
done all the time as we speak right now
and as when we finish 70 people will be
dead from cancer can you believe this 70
people an hour are dying from cancer in
this country and and and it's a horrific
death for the most part not a pleasant
death um and it's sad and it shouldn't
have to be this
way yeah that's that's absolutely I mean
even if you didn't have the knowledge on
glucose and glutamine it's probably not
how you should be fueling your body with
Coke when you're undergoing such
treatment look at it they tell infam
they go all these many cancer patients
are told eat whatever you want glucose
has nothing to do with cancer you know
get your get your fat get your sugar up
this is nuts I mean these guys don't
they have don't they know anything don't
they read the scientific literature
don't they understand the biology this
is the scary thing it's scary to know
that someone who's treating you has less
knowledge of the disease than the
patient or the patient both the blind
lead and the blind on this whole thing
and I know I hate to say this stuff I
mean it makes me but but gez I look at
the science and I know what I'm talking
about and I feel like when I see this
I'm saying oh my God this is this is so
tragic tragic on every level I'm
guessing the National Cancer Institute
is aware of your research and work
what's their take on it they ignore it I
mean uh I don't know know what's going
on with those guys I mean I've I've told
them I said what's going on who's the
guys writing these
uh web pages don't they know what
they're doing or they're being told by
some I I don't I I think that they
follow the they follow the the so-called
leaders in the field uh and the leaders
in the field think cancer is a genetic
disease so when the leaders have no clue
then the NIH the National Cancer
Institute has no clue so uh um and yeah
I mean and they why would they choose to
refuse oh hasn't been repeated well what
are the crank things why don't you guys
repeat it and see what's going on the
the new NIH director uh wants a lot of
the science to be repeated uh because
half the stuff coming out of the cancer
field can't be repeated anyway and and
the tragedy is a lot of the basic
research is done by thinking cancer is a
genetic disease and a lot of that can't
even be repeated so it's that's another
it's called broken broken science broken
science you can't repeat uh what the
other guy did and consequently no
advance and when you constantly keep
saying cancer is a gen let's target that
Gene let's look at the expression
profile let's look at this and look at
that listen we should we can look at
that later let's drop the death rate now
which we can do once we keep the death
rate down down down you can study all
this other stuff but why are we wasting
our time on things that aren't working
when we have an opportunity to reduce
the death rate let's let's get the
people under let's get this disease
under control and then we can worry
about minutia right now we're putting
all our energy into IA while all these
poor people are suffering and dying so
uh we we got we got everything backwards
on this whole cancer thing yes so to
your point on people not understanding
this you were on ped Tia's podcast a few
years ago and then last year peda was on
Andrew huberman's podcast talking about
how cancer is a genetic disease which I
thought was interesting for lack of a
better word given that you were one of
his guests and then BBC also put out
this video recently saying when you were
on the Diary of coo podcast that oh
there's Health misinformation spreading
so I'm trying to understand are there
legitimate questions coming from say
smart people like petera on why they're
not accepting this new theory of that
the the fact that cancer is a metabolic
disease it's called confirmation bias
okay uh which means that you go along
with the crowd um uh you know
ideological dogmatic ideology
ideological Dogma um you know Peter may
not doesn't want to rock the boat uh you
got to be bold you can't worry about the
Dogma you can't worry about people are
dying here if these guys knew what the
hell they were talking about you'd be
able to drop this death rate and they
don't okay that's what that's what gets
me upset yeah these guys are smart
they're supposed to be smart but maybe
they're not smart Okay because a smart
guy would say this this this doesn't
make this the whole cancer thing doesn't
make any sense based on the new science
oh it has to be repeated it has been
repeated over and over again you just
choose don't just don't want to read the
literature so um yeah I don't know what
it's going to take yeah BBC oh you miss
guys have they they don't they don't do
this research they they're not doing the
research I'm doing the research I'm the
one interrogating these tumor cells I'm
the one looking at all this stuff our
lab and other labs are doing this okay
these guys are just angry about stuff I
don't know well what why don't think I
don't really care what they think all I
know is we're right we're right on and
and and once they knew know that then
you goes oh man we knew this all yeah
right tell me about it you know we're
the ones do doing a lot of the research
to show this and and and and you know
we're seeing what other people have seen
but we're interpreting differently and
we can we because we understand
evolutionary biology have these guys
have no clue about evolutionary biology
it just it's when you it's the a veneer
here you got to remove the veneer and
you really find out that that what's
what's really happening yes we are
correct there's no question about it we
are the tip of the spear you want to
make difference in cancer you better
listen to what we're saying otherwise
we're not going
anywhere I had Charlie line weer on the
podcast I'm not sure if you're familiar
with his work I I know Charlie yeah he
he also approached it from the whole
evolutionary theory of cancer
perspective he doesn't I think he still
goes with the view that cancer is
genetic disease but it's not random
mutations but he has this whole
evolutionary perspective which I also
thought was was to to your point most
people don't bring that perspective onto
cancer research yeah well you have to
know evolutionary biology because the
cells that existed before oxygen were
all disregulated in their cell growth
all driven by a fermentation uh
metabolism um it wasn't until metazone
uh when you when you had uh the fusion
between one one bacteria with another
that you're able to produce uh uh energy
through utilization of oxygen which led
to metazoans multi cellular organisms I
mean if we didn't have that Fusion we'd
all be single cell we'd all still be in
our single cell state but but yeah I
mean there are disagreements um I've
looked at this I have all chapter in my
book on the on on nothing in cancer
biology makes sense except in the light
of evolution and uh yeah you spend a lot
of time I spend 20 I do this this
247 I'm I'm thinking about this stuff
while I'm sleeping at night I think
about this stuff all day long my Army of
my my undergraduates graduates and
professional scientists think about this
all the time where are we making a
mistake what are we missing in our
understanding of cancer and we think
about it does somebody have a new piece
of information that comes along
suggesting that we may not be correct we
have not yet found that and I'm looking
for that I want somebody to tell me
where I'm making my mistake and so far
they just disappear somewhere I I I
don't know
so please you tell me what am I what's
wrong with this picture what am I
telling you that's wrong with all the
stuff that I just told you it makes
sense to me I I don't know I mean I
clearly obviously don't think about this
24/7 so I'm not the right person I know
well no you must you must must think
about this all the time now and find out
you find some guy who says I'm wrong and
we'll look at at his his criticisms and
we'll take it under under advisement and
then and then figure out you know maybe
he'll make an important Improvement in
what we're doing you you know so um
we'll just have to see but right now uh
I have not seen where we have been made
in an error on this whole thing that
that's a great point I haven't seen
anyone directly
criticizing why your research is wrong
in terms of actually actually giving
explanations which is why it just
strikes me as bizarre that it's so hard
for people to accept but if I find
someone I mean that would that would be
a great conversation to have honestly
someone who has legitimate explanations
yeah well you know it's like for example
you got Dan Farber MD enderson Sloan
ketering the mafa cancer center the Fred
Hutch you got all these top and when you
walk into these place you can't help but
be impressed um you know you got all
these guys with white jackets and ties
and they look very very formal and they
they talk a talk they call Physicians
speak uh making you feel uh good and
then they poison and IR radiate you I
mean there's something wrong with this
picture right so um uh and then before
you know it you know uh oh he's you know
I'm feeling really good you know blah
blah and then the cancer comes back and
we're going to get more and more and the
cancer comes back cancer comes back and
the next thing you know you're finished
you know you're looking for the burial
plots you know the the uh you got to get
on top of this when you first get get
that metabolic therapy going oh we can
do so many things with this if if we all
work together with a common goal uh we
would be able to manage this cancer
pretty effectively
let's talk about G blastoma which is one
of the most deadly types of cancer brain
cancer you said you recently did uh
finished a study on it or research study
on it what was what was that talking
about well that was a a treatment
protocol that we put together uh based
on our knowledge of the biology and the
biochemistry and uh my colleague Dr
Thomas duer first author on the paper uh
he's an mdphd and he will eventually be
the director of these clinical trials um
uh we had to get the science straight
first and then we have you know there's
a lot of options we got to bring the
glucose and glutamine down but then then
what how do you do it um and Thomas put
a tremendous amount of energy into this
and several other distinguished uh
people who work in nutrition uh and and
um in the areas clinics and
things they came on as co-authors so
um you know it's just how do we go and
the other problem of course right now is
you're not allowed to do that uh we
wrote a protocol that's not permitted
according to standard of care so now we
have a problem we have this beautiful
way to treat brain cancer gleo blasto
and and that same strategy can be just
tweaked slightly for all the major
cancers because it's still a singular
disease what happens in a gleo blastoma
happens in a liver colon breast they're
all fermenting they're all throwing out
glucose and glutamine it's just in a
different organ and a different tissue
so but it's basically the same metabolic
problem very similar very similar
metabolic problem we also found out that
the key when you're in nutritional
ketosis you can deliver drugs through
the blood brain barrier much faster uh
easier so you don't we have we've seen
so much to make this stuff better but
they're locked into this radiation
standard of care first so what they do
they don't allow what we're saying to be
done they say uh well uh we'll we'll let
you do recurrent Goma what does that
mean oh we'll give the patient radiation
and chemo timide steroids and then when
it doesn't work which almost all the
time it doesn't work then maybe we'll
consider doing metabolic therapy no no
no no get the metabolic therapy on there
first as a and and then maybe if that
doesn't work we'll do a little
radiation you know what I'm saying
shrink the tumor down have the
neurosurgeon debulk it and then go back
with metabolic therapy and if we need
radiation or a little bit of Timol down
the road uh will do that completely
turning around the standard of care for
G G blastoma but when we spoke to these
uh uh brain cancer onology centers it's
almost like I blasphemed telling them
that that we want to do it a different
way it was almost so a a front and I
said to these guys all your patients are
dying don't you guys have any real
realization that you've been doing the
same thing for 100 years and making zero
progress and now you want to be
resistant to anything that might work
you tell me where the where the logic of
this is going but they've been so
comfortable in doing what they do they
think oh if we don't do what we do the
patient will die sooner well what the
hell we're not we're not doing nothing
we're transforming the whole thing to
make it better not doing nothing you
know I I you're up against I don't know
what it is calcification of rational
thinking and uh it's just the most
amazing thing I've seen but I go back
listen you go back in history of Science
and you see very very similar kinds of
things uh the geocentric
heliocentric view of the solar system
where the Earth was considered immovable
and the Sun and all the planets revolved
around the earth and when capern Aus
said maybe we should put the sun in the
center and have the Earth uh just be
another planet like the others revolving
um you know in is revolution of Bo paper
that he that book that he published and
then follow followed by Kepler with the
um the ellipticals and then Galileo with
the telescope um to look at this and he
was house arrested for things that he
said to the pope and don't forget the
Catholic Church finally recognized the
um the the the heliocentric model in the
in the 1800s sometime so I mean people
adapt very slowly when it challenges
your very thinking about about things uh
in a pray profound way people don't just
readily go wow this is the greatest
thing I've heard let's let's do that no
no no they're going to resist it tooth
and nail until until it becomes so
overwhelmingly obvious that they have to
accept it for looking like buffoons um
so uh eventually it'll happen because
people in cancer you know if if if you
thought that the Earth was the center of
the solar system uh you know and the Sun
goes around the earth on a daily basis
okay you know maybe but not that doesn't
lead to 6,700 people a day dying your
your view on that but when you consider
cancer as a genetic disease that's
responsible for 1,700 people a day dying
so um uh so people better get their act
together and start thinking about this
otherwise in fact why should I worry
about it I know what to do if I got kids
the hell should I worry about what
everybody else that's doing so um you
know it's just sad it's sad
uh you know I maybe I shouldn't say
anything maybe I should just retire go
down to Florida relax lay on the beach
you know get a get a nice sit under a
grass Hut with a my taii why should I
worry about all this stuff no I I think
your work is remarkable what one thing
actually that that was really shocking
to me is that you say that radiation
itself is fueling the two fuels that you
don't want for cancer which is it's
fueling the glucose and glutamine so
it's it's not that it's not making
things better it might be making things
worse oh yeah absolutely in fact we
published that paper in Lancet oncology
in
2010 because I'm I I I I I have I'm
neurochemist okay so I study epilepsy I
study the brain or neuros circuitry and
all this kind of stuff and we have a
glutamine glutamate cycle put out some
of my colleagues Dr Mary McKenna and
others that that have really done a lot
of work on this area we have very
tightly linked the glutamine and the GL
and the glutamate cycle uh what happens
is and when when we send out a signal in
our neuron we release a small chemical
called glutamate it's an excitatory
neurotransmitter and it excites nmda
receptors so that you and I can speak
and we can think because of of the
neurochemical activities that are
happening in our brain uh and our eyes
and other areas that of the nervous
system but as soon as that glutamate is
released it has to be impact the
receptor quick but then it has to be
removed very quickly otherwise we get
oyot toxicity which means the glutamate
stays and excites the neuron until it's
dead the neurons die so we have a very
elaborate system where the gel cells uh
take up the the glutamate right after
it's released and right after it
stimulates the receptor it has to be
removed and the glutamate is then taken
back up into the gal cell and converts
this to
glutamine and then the glutamine is
taken up by the neuron and re REM
metabolized to glut glutamate so
glutamate to glutamine back to glutamate
and it's a very tightly regulated system
in order to keep our brain function so
you come in there uh with somebody with
a gleo blastoma and then you you cut out
this tumor and irradiate the air you're
breaking apart all of the glutamine
glutamate cycle you're freeing up
massive amounts of glucose and when you
irradiate somebody the blood sugar goes
up uh the brain swells and then you give
high do steroids uh to reduce uh the
inflammation which makes you have
hypoglycemia in the blood and the and
the and the glutamate killing the
neurons frees up all this glutamate
which is an
excitotoxic molecule leaving creating a
tremendous amount of glutamine in the
micro environment and you put all that
together and you get uh survival
anywhere from 8 to 15 months and it's
been done that way for for 100 years and
you're doing you wonder why very few
people survive because you're creating
an environment that makes
that puts the makes the tumor recur
rapidly and uh it's not a mystery what
you're doing to these poor patient is
sealing their their death sentence right
away by doing that so you got to stop
doing this crazy stuff uh otherwise
you're not going to get any advance and
yet they don't want to change they don't
want to change so my God what are they
doing it's it's just tragic on every
level do you think the standard of care
might be worse for glioblastoma compared
types of cancer or is it equally all
current standard of care for gleo
blastoma is responsible for the overall
poor survival and death of these
patients Absolutely I'll stand by that
because I have the scientific evidence
to support that so it's the people you
do this they've never heard of it so I
mean what's going on here they trained
to uh use radiation so smoke doesn't
come out of somebody's ear you know the
they they're they're not trained to know
the biology of this the surgeons know
how to take this out and my friend
neurosurgeon friends say yes so we
shrink that down uh if we can shrink
that tumor down and make the borders
more sharp the probability of debulking
a greater amount of the tumor will be
significantly increased by metabolic
therapy which is known to co already
give people a much longer survival the
the more the tumor is is is is debulked
that means taken out the longer the
survival is problem with gleo blastoma
the edges are very very fuzzy and and
you got a lot of the tumor cells already
invaded into the normal part of the
brain and you don't see them so when the
surgeon says oh we got most of it but
not all of it you know your death you
got there you got to get it all how am I
going to get it all shrink it down and
then debulk the whole thing and you put
so if you have a watchful waiting period
of a two weeks sometimes before you
debulk it not always sometimes you have
to take it out I know this St you have
to take it out otherwise it could get
Hemorrhage and P patient could die in
one day but if you have any watchful
waiting period Then you shrink the damn
thing down let the neurosurgeon take it
out and then come back with metabolic
therapy it's a it's a plan strategy that
will that will almost guarantee almost
guarantee much greater survival but they
don't do that so I don't know what to
say in gleo blastoma can you shrink it
all the way down just with metabolic
therapy or do you think debulking in
that case probably makes sense yeah I
don't think it can sh I think with
glucose and glutamine targeting you
might be able to get it down to the
point where a surgeon can cure it uh by
taking it all out but we're not doing
that we're not doing that at all so
we're only doing the metabolic therapy
after you created this inflamed micro
environment leading to the tumor cells
seating throughout your brain and then
they come back so um you know everything
we're doing is just not I think we can
do those things but I just think we have
to do them in a different
order have you done any studies on
trying metabolic therapy for other neuro
degenerative
diseases well for sure for epilepsy I
mean we've been doing that for little
kids for for decades you know that's how
I got all this knowledge about ketones
and I work with some people and I I is
that restricting glutamine as well or is
that only no actually just the ketogenic
diet yeah and and we're not really sure
how that's working completely at all uh
what we know is that it's it's a balance
between ketones and glucose um we had
little kids that were completely managed
uh with ketogenic metabolic therapy and
then they would take a muffin or a drink
and explode right back into a seizure
breakthrough seizures really quick even
though you spent months trying to manage
this kid all of a sudden he goes to a
birthday party and gets some cupcake and
it's boom he got breakthrough seizure um
so very fast whereas cancer you don't
you don't have that um if you were had
it managed and You' go out and drink a
muffin or eat eat something sweet yes
you will cause a number of the cells to
to to to get a little bit more
aggressive but but you don't see it you
don't feel it um like you would an
epileptic seizure it's obvious to
everybody there something something
something just exploded um there's no
mystery here so uh so you know and we
can manage sometimes the epileptic
seizures they don't come back they're
they're they're they're resolved in some
in some Stu kids so so um an adults I
don't know it works for them then we had
you know guys doing modified Atkins
diets and different kinds of formations
of ketogen it make it a little bit less
rigorous than sometimes it's a lot of
exploration and that should be the same
kind of thing we do in the in the
pediatric oncology this is another
tragic all these little kids brutalized
by a system then they should be the
Pediatric um epilepsy pediatric oncology
guys should be arm in-arm in in working
together on this and yet the Great Wall
of China separates these two uh PL in
the same medical school yet one side
they're doing P radiating and poisoning
kids and the other side they're using
this a very similar therapy to metabolic
therapy to manage seizures and they
don't cross
you know um which is like nuts itself so
so yeah so um uh pediatric oncology we
we should be able to make a big in fact
we have a paper under review right now
using uh a ketogenic metabolic therapy
uh for managing pediatric brain tumors
um you know we have all this stuff we're
working on it as hard as we can because
we know this will be the future also uh
but I don't know how long it's going to
take for these guys to come to their
senses
um I don't know it just takes time I
guess what about Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's do you think it that's worth
exploring as well through metabolic
therapy yeah I think so um uh because I
published a paper on Parkinson's disease
it's another kind of a mitochondrial
problem um the problem with Parkinson's
disease when the mitochondria becomes
sick the neurons die and uh in the
substantial part of the brain and
you get movement disorders and these
things so you're not causing the the
neurons to and the other thing too
cancer doesn't happen in neurons it
happens in gal cells uh neurons cannot
tolerate fermentation energy for very
long so when you have sick mitochondria
in a neuron the neuron usually up and
dies it doesn't it doesn't transform
into a disregulated regulated growth um
but there's a lot of reactive oxygen
species and inflammation in the neurons
of Parkinson's disease so I think that
uh ketogenic metabolic therapy could be
perfected in a slightly different way
uh you won't need to Target glutamine as
far as I know um maybe you do I I
haven't thought about that enough on
that as far as Alzheimer's disease is
concerned it's absolutely uh can be um
uh reduced uh by um ketogenic metabolic
therapy our brains are becoming distort
one of the things that's interesting in
Alzheimer's disease they are starved for
sugar um they they seem to uh and that's
one thing you don't often get there's a
people who with Alzheimer's have less
cancer than than the regular folks
because they're being stared the glucose
you can't drive disregulated growth
without the glucose and uh it's really
amazing but yes probably about 40 to 50%
of Alzheimer's diseases could be
prevented don't don't forget our
Paleolithic ancestors well maybe they
didn't live long enough to get Alzheimer
disease um they died from injuries and
infections uh but but um people who live
according to their traditional ways they
don't seem to have cancer type 2
diabetes or Alzheimer's disease at the
same rate that you would see in people
living the Great American diet and
lifestyle our greatest our greatest gift
to the world the Great American diet
lifestyle guaranteed to give you type
two diabetes cancer dementia and all
these other things that that we like to
like to
distribute so if someone wanted to
prevent cancer it sounds like
going back to the Paleolithic diet is
obviously going to be helpful do you
think it's Paleolithic diet and
Paleolithic lifestyle which is a lot of
exercise okay uh you're doing a lot of
you know how hard it is to track down
and kill a big animal I mean using
Spears and rocks and things like this
not using a high-powered
weapon do you know how hard it is to
chop hack up a big elephant or a big uh
water buffalo and eat it I mean you're
the exercise I me exhausted just trying
to get the meat off this thing um so uh
and we're sitting in traffic we're all
freaked out you know watching cell our
computers and cell phones sitting on the
couch looking at the cell phone watching
the TV you know eating some highly car
processed car hydrate and we oh where
did this tuor come from oh how come I
can't think straight anymore um so uh
yeah it's our diet it's a whole thing
prevention of cancer and all these but
but people don't want to do that they
want to they love the highly processed
carbs they they like to sit they like
they don't like sitting in traffic but
you know they have angry about things
poor sleep uh all these things all come
together and bathed in in Forever
chemicals and and Plastics uh you put
all that crap together and and you get
all these health problems associated
with it yeah so sometimes you hear of
young healthy fit individuals super fit
people who eatan
and look great end up having cancer
people in their 20s and 30s what do you
think is going on there well it's diet
lifestyle and uh chemicals in the
environment and they eat we don't know
what they're eating I don't know keep
keep they might think they're eating
healthy and they're
not right I mean we oh I'm a fit guy you
know uh okay the morbidly obese guy you
he might say well I know what he's got
he's got a problem he's got diabetes
systemic inflammation he's got all these
kinds of things as a matter of fact
diabet is replacing smoking as a major
health risk factor uh but the guy that
does I do exercise all the time you know
I did this I did that yeah but maybe you
have emotional freak out I don't know
you might have other things in your
system that's can all I know is when
those guys get cancered they're
fermenters the cancers are fermenters
they're using glucose and glutamine uh
no matter where it comes from no matter
who it is what age they they're that so
then we have to go into into management
section rather than prevention you can't
it's very hard to get cancer if your
mitochondria remain healthy that that's
what we because it's a mitochondrial
metabolic disease so if you keep your
mitochondria healthy probability of
cancer is extremely
low so someone's listening to this and
wants to try the metabolic therapy
because they have cancer or all loved
one who does are there certain resources
you direct them to to follow the
protocol yeah well a lot of our papers
all open access the majority of them um
you know they're pretty heavy into the
science but the paper that we just
published Dr du's paper is kind of a
protocol um if you can follow that then
and it's detailed you know there's a lot
of supplements people can take uh uh
that can um you know maybe push it in
the right direction a little bit uh
facilitate the action of glucose and
glutamine so um uh that paper's open
access
to bio biom biom Central medicine BMC
medicine uh big Journal uh which is very
detailed Thomas put a huge amount of
work into this all the detail things but
again people can read it look at it uh
our Press pz Paper uh is the conceptual
that's the framework upon which Thomas's
paper was based it's open access so
anybody can and they just you know
problem is they keep bombarding me with
all these questions that are all
answered in the papers um they don't
read the papers and then they ask me all
these things that are already answered
in the papers so I want somebody to read
read the papers carefully and then if
it's not clear I'll be happy to answer a
question but please read the papers
before bombarding me with all the things
that are already put out in the paper
you know I I'll link to the latest one
as well so hopefully that's helpful yeah
and people have to realize that our
research is supported predominantly by
private foundations in philanthropy and
that keeps us going uh and there are
people what when people donate money to
me through the University or through
Travis christopherson's Foundation we
acknowledge them in the scientific
papers that we publish so you know there
are people out there that says I want to
be part of the movement I I want to know
that I participated and what I do is I
uh acknowledge them and the back look at
the papers that we publish and you'll
see the acknowledgement section and you
say who are all these people well those
are the people that are giving us the
money to do the research that we're
doing and people say whoa I'm I feel
really good about that and they just
they go ahead and give us money and then
we when we publish the paper we
acknowledge them um you'll see these
names so that's that's how how we move
forward we're keeping as long as people
continue to support our research we're
not going anywhere we we're we're we're
we're still pushing forward we'll push
and push and push until the funds dry up
and hopefully they don't dry up and how
can someone listening to this support
your research well as I said Travis
christopherson's Foundation of cancer
metabolic therapies it's a
503 Foundation they make donations to
his foundation and then through Boston
College uh my I have a on the on the
biology Department there's a place a
little button to say donate and you go
through a few steps and people people
make donations directly to me through
the university so uh those are our two
primary sources and then we have some
small foundations of course um that are
interested in like a breast cancer or
colon cancer and they they they we they
support we support pre-clinical research
uh the pre-clinical research is is then
the the foundation upon which we do the
clinical work so my my friends that are
do clinical work will start adapting our
findings from the preclinical studies
into the clinic we're one of the few
groups that really does have B to
bedside we do we we we fire this stuff
out really fast into the clinics uh that
are that are doing that are able to do
and matify some of these
things lastly what are some of the open
questions that you are currently
exploring in your research well right
now you know we have uh shown in gleo
blastoma in preclinical with a human
cell line and two mouse cell lines that
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation is a major driver uh of
this um we like to establish that for
all the major cancers we want to see if
there's any cancer that we can find that
doesn't uh that doesn't follow this uh
this common pathophysiological problem
that would be an eyeopener for us
because then we would have to modify
that but it takes a lot of time to work
these things out um yeah so and the
other thing we're working on in Vivo uh
which is in the preclinical do what are
the what are the really unique drug diet
combos uh that would work the best in
other words get the greatest amount of
therapeutic benefit with the minimal or
absence of any toxicity so uh again this
whole this is the new the new world the
new world is drug diet combinations uh
diet drug combinations that work
synergistically together so the drugs
work better under a particular dietary
setup and and that's what we're working
on too so uh again all of this stuff is
the beginning but it will all be
perfected in the end uh super efficiency
in the in the metabolic centers uh and
this is the future it's it's just that
it's so new and not recognized uh by the
majority of people but it's coming I'm
I'm looking forward to that so thank you
for all the work you're doing is there
anything else that you'd like to mention
before we close no I I think we covered
a lot of the bases here uh I mean we
talk in my lab we what what I've
discussed with you is what we talk about
every day for hours and then do research
and talk about it more and talk about it
more and do more research and we so what
I'm doing to you is nothing more
different than what I do next door to my
colleagues because they're always asking
uh
about of course we go into a lot more
detail uh the scientific Concepts and
experiments design and this kind of
stuff but the overall discussions of of
the Frameworks and things is no
different than what you and I have just
discussed Professor seed please don't
retire to Florida because we need you
and thank you so much all right thank
you very much I'm looking forward to
going back to
Kolkata oh that's going to be great let
let me know next time you go I'll
recommend some food options
maybe maybe one day you can do it today
yeah have some
glucose all right thank you very much a
real pleasure hi everyone if you wish to
be notified of future podcast episodes
and my writing on longevity and the
frontiers of biology Please Subscribe at
live longer
world.com and if you're enjoying the
show please leave a rating on Apple
Spotify or elsewhere thank you for
listening and I we'll see you next time